The Trump administration released a preliminary 2018 budget proposal on Wednesday, and with it comes official details on how the new White House plans to pay for the controversial border wall.
According to the 2017 proposal, the wall will cost taxpayers $2 billion this year. The White House expects to spend $4.1 billion on the wall through 2018.
RELATED: President Trump's border wall reportedly facing hurdles
Trump promised throughout the 2016 campaign that not only will a wall on the Mexican-American border be built, but that Mexico would pay for it. The campaign promise evolved into a rallying cry of Trump's campaign events, with then presidential candidate Trump often leading attendees in a call-and-response chant.
---
Critics have already called Trump's new budget proposal the nail in the coffin for his border wall promise. However, the billionaire businessman's team has been pivoting since taking office regarding how Mexico will pay for the wall.
Calls for Mexico to pay for the wall have morphed into Mexico will reimburse America for the wall. Trump says that this pivot is out of urgency to get wall construction underway immediately.
"I don't feel like waiting a year or year and a half. We're going to start building. Mexico in some form and there are many different forms, will reimburse us and they will reimburse us for the cost of the wall. That will happen. Whether it's a tax or whether it's a payment," Trump said during a press conference back in January.
SEE ALSO: Senate Intelligence committee speaks out on Trump wiretapping
Recently, Republican leaders have grown more outspoken against the idea that Mexico will front the wall bill. "Uh, no," said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell when asked if Mexico will pay for a southern border wall.
Sign up for Breaking News by AOL to get the latest breaking news alerts and updates delivered straight to your inbox.
"I'm in favor of border security. There are probably some places along the border where that is probably not the best way to secure the border," McConnell added.
A Department of Homeland Security report estimated the cost of the wall would be $21.6 billion, far higher than the $12 billion estimate coming from Trump's team.
A Pew poll from February 2017 found 62 percent of Americans oppose building the wall and 35 favor the move.
---
Maria Flores and her siblings have owned a 16-acre property along a bend in the Rio Grande River for so long none of them can remember when their family acquired it.
On January 12, her daughter, Yvette Salinas, received a legal notice from the Department of Homeland Security with a 21-page "Declaration of Taking," offering Flores $2,900 for 1.2 acres of her property along the river.
"The United States of America is acquiring property along its border with Mexico in order to construct a fence and related improvements designed to secure the border," the letter said. "The purpose of this letter is to confer about the amount of just compensation in this case."
"It's scary when you read it," Salinas told The Texas Observer. "You feel like you have to sign."
Flores has the option to refuse the offer, but the government could then seize it, with compensation, through eminent domain.
And the budget proposal submitted by President Donald Trump on Thursday suggests his administration is gearing up for a fight over properties like the Flores family's.
Donald Trump at a news conference near the US-Mexico border outside Laredo, Texas. Reuters/Rick Wilking
The 2018 budget request submitted by Trump asks for $27.7 billion for the Justice Department, a $1.1 billion decrease over the previous year's amount. A list of bullet points highlighting the budget's priorities includes the following:
"Supports the addition of 20 attorneys to pursue Federal efforts to obtain the land and holdings necessary to secure the Southwest border and another 20 attorneys and support staff for immigration litigation assistance."
That foreshadows "bitter legal fights with landowners from Texas to California over the seizure of private property," The New York Times' Matt Apuzzo notes.
Should the federal government come for the Floreses' property in Texas — which sits near an elbow of the Rio Grande in Hidalgo County, between McAllen and Rio Grande City — it would not be the first time.
Los Ebanos Texas Rio Grande Valley map US Mexico border
Los Ebanos, near McAllen, Texas, sits on a bend in the Rio Grande River. Christopher Woody/Google Maps
They, and others in the area, got a similar notice in 2008 that offered the same $2,900. Their land sits on the river's floodplain, however, where a US-Mexico treaty prohibits any building.
That restriction, plus the passage of time, ultimately spared their land, as the Obama administration deemphasized wall construction. (The US commission overseeing that treaty dropped its objection to building on the floodplain in 2012.)
Overall, the Trump administration plans to ask for more than $4 billion through 2018 for the wall's construction. Trump has previously cited $12 billion as the wall's cost, while a Homeland Security estimate put the total as high as $21.6 billion.
A supplemental spending bill will request $1.5 billion, and the fiscal-year 2018 budget will ask for $2.6 billion, Mick Mulvaney, the chief of the White House Office on Management and Budget, told reporters this week, saying his office had turned Trump's "policies into numbers."
Mick Mulvaney AP
Mulvaney said some of the $1.5 billion portion would go toward "pilot cases" in areas along the border where Homeland Security may experiment with different types of border walling.
The OMB director also further distanced the wall's funding from Trump's promises that Mexico would pay for it: "It's coming out of the Treasury," he said.
Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer, the Senate minority leader, said the wall-funding proposal would be a "poison pill" that might cause a government shutdown, according to Politico.
Politico also obtained audio of Republican Sen. Cory Gardner of Colorado criticizing the idea for the wall in remarks to constituents this week.
Legislators from the Texas-Mexico border area have also criticized the idea of a border wall. And residents there, even the ones who support the wall, have misgivings about whether it would work.
Robert Cameron, who runs Texas Border Tours in the Rio Grande Valley area, told CNN in February that he supported Trump and the idea to build a wall, even though he disputed the picture of insecurity many had painted about the border area and didn't want to see friends and relatives who were living in the country illegally get deported.
But Cameron was skeptical about how effective the wall would be.
He recalled President George W. Bush's border-fence construction efforts in the mid-2000s, when construction created a no-man's land between the fence and the river, and gaps in the barrier were left to allow property owners access to their land south of the fence.
A boy looks as U.S. workers build a section of the U.S.-Mexico border wall.
A boy watching US workers build a section of a US-Mexico border wall. Jose Luis Gonzalez/Reuters
"This is definitely not secure," Cameron told CNN earlier this year, driving along portions of the fence already built along the border. "I don't know h
---
MEXICO CITY — Even as Mexico fumes over President Trump’s aggressive stance toward its people, the Mexican government is quietly trying to rip up basic legal protections for its citizens at home and gut longstanding efforts to fix the nation’s broken rule of law.
Legal experts fear the move will set back human rights in Mexico by decades.
The tool is an innocuous-sounding bill, submitted last month by a close ally of President Enrique Peña Nieto — only a day after his government publicly chided the Trump administration to respect the rights of all Mexicans.
The governing party says the bill, labeled a reform to the criminal code, will make “adjustments” to Mexico’s new legal system, a linchpin of cooperation with the United States that was completed last year with more than $300 million in American aid. It is widely considered Mexico’s most important legal advancement in the past century.
But while the American-backed legal system is supposed to enshrine human rights in a nation desperately lacking them, this new bill heads squarely in the other direction. Legal scholars say it will broaden the power of the Mexican government to detain suspects for years before trial, enable the police to rely on hearsay in court and potentially allow prosecutors to use evidence obtained by torture.
Mexico Grapples With a Surge in Violence DEC. 13, 2016
Investigators Say Mexico Has Thwarted Efforts to Solve Students’ Disappearance APRIL 22, 2016
Inquiry Challenges Mexico’s Account of How 43 Students Vanished APRIL 24, 2016
As Frustrations With Mexico’s Government Rise, So Do Lynchings JAN. 23, 2016
In Mexico, Learning Courtroom Basics AUG. 27, 2012
Beyond that, the bill, which has not yet been approved by Congress, flips the very premise of modern justice on its head: Rather than innocent before proved guilty, it would require concrete evidence of reasonable doubt, essentially shifting the burden of proof to the accused.
“It is not only a counter reform, but it has reforms that contravene the right to a proper defense,” said Alejandra Ramos, a judge in the state of Chihuahua. “They want to pass this because it is easier to do than to train police officers and prosecutors, clean up the entire system and break the use of torture as the main tool of investigation.”
The new legislation reflects a central contradiction of modern Mexico under Mr. Peña Nieto and his party: the version of the country that his government promotes to the world versus the reality it creates on the ground.
In promoting Brand Mexico, the government has fashioned the image of an ascending nation, a regional leader ready to take its place on the global stage, competitive on issues of trade, economics and culture. And yet, presented with mounting violence, vast inequality and a human rights crisis in which torture at the hands of security forces is “generalized,” in the words of the United Nations, the same government frequently runs roughshod over the rights it claims to defend.
In October 2014, members of the Mexican Army and the federal police arrived in Iguala to assume the duties of policing the city, after 43 students disappeared there. Credit Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York Times
The government’s recent scolding of the Trump administration — while actively trying to roll back the rights of Mexicans at home — underscores the paradox.
When Mr. Trump ordered a wall between the two nations, the Mexicans called it an alarming assault on their dignity, vowing to defend their citizens in the United States and publicly insisting last month that “all Mexicans should be treated with absolute respect to their civil rights and human rights.”
But back home, the Mexican government was busy doing the opposite, introducing a bill to reverse central tenets of the new justice system with such little publicity that many lawmakers, judges and defense lawyers do not even know about it.
International bodies that oversee Mexico’s human rights record say the legislation is part of a long pattern by the government. In its handling of the vast corruption that runs through the justice and political systems, the impunity of its security forces, or the investigations into the tens of thousands of disappearances across the country, they say, the government often undermines the major breakthroughs it claims to be making.
“Mexico has worked hard to promote its image as a state that defends or advances international human rights,” said James Cavallaro, a commissioner on the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and a professor at Stanford Law School. “But at home, the human rights situation is simply dreadful: severe abuse, torture, summary executions and virtually guaranteed impunity.”
The bill is part of a broader packet of changes. The governing party and other lawmakers have also submitted several versions of a separate law that would legalize the army’s enforcement of domestic security, a role